Clarify ForceFlush/Shutdown (#878)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/sdk.md

Shuts down the processor. Called when SDK is shut down. This is an opportunity
for processor to do any cleanup required.

`Shutdown` should be called only once for each `SpanProcessor` instance. After
the call to `Shutdown` subsequent calls to `OnStart`, `OnEnd`, or `ForceFlush`

> are not allowed. Language library authors can decide if they want to make

Author: I think it is still not very clear when we say "subsequent calls to ... are not allowed" - what would happen if users called them? Do we need to ensure no-op, or there could be undefined behaviors as long as we don't throw exception?

Reviewer: I assume "not allowed" means "undefined behavior if you do it".

Reviewer 2: Agree this should be clarified in the spec. IMO, no-op seems good.

Author: @tigrannajaryan if it means "undefined behavior and good luck", it seems to be scary as it avoids the [general guideline](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/error-handling.md#basic-error-handling-principles).

Here are the potential options:
1. It should be a no-op.
2. It is undefined behavior (e.g. you might get resource leaks, deadlocks), but we will follow the general error handling principle and avoid throwing exception (by swallow all exceptions basically).
3. It is a defined behavior with unspecified side effects (e.g. we should guarantee that the SDK is not going to an error mode, such like causing live loops, dead locks, resource leaks; but the processor might still pass the span accidentally if folks called OnEnd after Shutdown).

I think we should try to avoid 2 since it seems too bad. I would personally prefer 1, but 3 sounds fine to me as well.

Reviewer: @reyang I am not advocating for the undefined behavior. I am merely saying that I perceive the phrase "not allowed" as meaning "you are on your own if you do it since we don't tell you what happens in that case". :-)

I don't have a strong opinion on what's the desirable option, but no-op is likely preferable. It means the exporter needs to keep track of the state, which it likely has to anyway, so no big deal.

Reviewer 3: I agree that a no-op should be a must here if that's what we agree on, happy also to have it as undefined behavior.

`Shutdown` a blocking API or an asynchronous API which notifies the caller via a
callback or an event.

> `Shutdown` should not run indefinitely. Language library authors can decide if

Author: I've refrained from `block` as I think `Node.js` there is no way to _block_ unless we spin.

Reviewer 4: "run" may still not very clear, like is asynchronous run also considered as `Shutdown` is running? Probably say `Shutdown` should return in given time?

Author: In .NET a function could return a `Task` which is essentially a continuation. In this case, even if the `Shutdown` function returns, the shutdown code is still running.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I think the run here needs to be about the time until it completes, not the method returns (for async case). Personally found `run` clear enough, otherwise can use terms like `Shutdown should complete within some timeout`.

Reviewer 5: I think the current wording with "run" adds no information at all, I would prefer either removing that sentence entirely or replacing it with the "within some timeout" wording that @anuraaga suggests. If we add that timeout, I would also add a SHOULD-requirement that a boolean should be returned / part of the completion event to indicate whether the shutdown was successful or ran into the timeout, same as for ForceFlush.

> they want to make the shutdown timeout configurable.

Reviewer 5: I would add a sentence that shutdown MUST include the effects of ForceFlush.

#### ForceFlush()

> Export all ended spans to the configured `Exporter` that have not yet been

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Export all pending spans to the configured `Exporter` that have not yet been
```

Some SpanProcessors (zPages?) may deal with un-ended spans.

exported.

> `ForceFlush` should provide a way to let the caller know whether it succeeded,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`ForceFlush` SHOULD provide a way to let the caller know whether it succeeded,
```

> failed or timed out. Language library authors can decide if they want to make
> `ForceFlush` a blocking API or an asynchronous API which notifies the caller via

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
failed or timed out. `ForceFlush` can be implemented as a blocking API or an asynchronous API which notifies the caller via
```

a callback or an event.

`ForceFlush` should only be called in cases where it is absolutely necessary,
such as when using some FaaS providers that may suspend the process after an
invocation, but before the `Processor` exports the completed spans.

`ForceFlush` should not run indefinitely. Language library authors can decide if
they want to make the flush timeout configurable.

> 

Reviewer: Do we want any recommendations for the case when exporters are chained? Do we want to recommend that ForceFlush is called via the chain all the way until the last one?

Reviewer 5: That would belong in the exporter spec, but yes.

Author: I can follow up with another PR once this gets merged.

Shuts down the processor. Called when SDK is shut down. This is an opportunity
for processor to do any cleanup required.

`Shutdown` SHOULD be called only once for each `SpanProcessor` instance. After

> the call to `Shutdown` subsequent calls to `OnStart`, `OnEnd`, or `ForceFlush`

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
the call to `Shutdown`, subsequent calls to `OnStart`, `OnEnd`, or `ForceFlush`
```

> are not allowed, and should be no-op if possible.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
are not allowed. SDKs SHOULD ignore these calls gracefully, if possible.
```

`Shutdown` SHOULD provide a way to let the caller know whether it succeeded,
failed or timed out.

> `Shutdown` MUST include the effects of `ForceFlush`.

Reviewer 6: Nice wording! Elegantly avoids the spec prescribing how it should be implemented (no "x MUST call y").

> `Shutdown` SHOULD complete within some timeout. `Shutdown` can be implemented as

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
`Shutdown` SHOULD complete or abort within some timeout. `Shutdown` can be implemented as
```
"Complete" sounds like it only covers shutting down successfully.

a blocking API or an asynchronous API which notifies the caller via a callback
or an event. Language library authors can decide if they want to make the
shutdown timeout configurable.

#### ForceFlush()

> Exports all pending spans to the configured `Exporter` that have not yet been
> exported.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Exports all spans that have not yet been exported to the configured `Exporter`.
```

`ForceFlush` SHOULD provide a way to let the caller know whether it succeeded,
failed or timed out.

`ForceFlush` SHOULD only be called in cases where it is absolutely necessary,
such as when using some FaaS providers that may suspend the process after an

> invocation, but before the `Processor` exports the completed spans.

Reviewer 6: Maybe we should consider splitting the spec into "usage instructions" for users and "implementation guidelines" for the language implementations/SIGs.
For now, we could phrase this as "Users SHOULD only call..." to make it clearer to whom this instruction is aimed at.

> `ForceFlush` SHOULD complete within some timeout. `ForceFlush` can be

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
`ForceFlush` SHOULD complete or abort within some timeout. `ForceFlush` can be
```
